Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all
devils, and to cure diseases. And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to
heal the sick. And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither staves nor
scrip, neither bread, neither money, neither have two coats apiece, and whatsoever house
ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart. And whosoever will not receive you, when ye
go out of that city, shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them.
And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the gospel, and healing everywhere.
Now Herod the Tetrarch heard of all that was done by him, and he was perplexed, because
that it was said of some that John was risen from the dead, and of some that Elias had
and of others that one of the old prophets was risen again. And Herod said, John have
I beheaded, but who is this of whom I hear such things? And he desired to see him. And
the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they had done, and he took them
and went aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city called Bethsaida. And
the people, when they knew it, followed him. And he received them, and spake unto them
of the kingdom of God, and healed them that had need of healing. And when the day began
to wear away, then came the twelve, and said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they
may go into the towns, and country round about, and lodge, and get vigils, for we are here
in a desert place. But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We have
no more but five loaves and two fishes, except we should go and buy meat for all this people.
For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them sit down
by fifties in a company. And they did so, and made them all sit down. Then he took the
five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven he blessed them and break, and
gave to the disciples to set before the multitude. And they did eat, and were all filled, and
there was taken up of fragments that remained to them twelve baskets. And it came to pass,
as he was alone praying, his disciples were with him, and he asked them, saying, Whom
say the people that I am? They answering said, John the Baptist. But some say, Elias, and
others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again. And he said unto them, But whom
say ye that I am? Peter answering said, The Christ of God. And he straightly charged
them and commanded them to tell no man that thing, saying, The son of man must suffer
many things, and be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain,
and be raised the third day. And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. For whosoever will save his
life shall lose it. But whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save
it. For what is a man advantaged if he gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast
away? For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the son of man
be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and in his father's, and of the holy
angels. But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shall not taste
of death, till they see the kingdom of God. And it came to pass, about an eight days after
these sayings, he took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.
And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and
glistering. And behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias, who
appeared in glory, and spake of his decease, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. But
Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep, and when they were awake, they
saw his glory, and the two men that stood with him. And it came to pass, as they departed
from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us make
three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias, not knowing what
he said. While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them, and they feared
as they entered into the cloud. And there came a voice out of the cloud saying, This
is my beloved son, hear him. And when the voice was passed, Jesus was found alone, and
they kept it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen.
And it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come down from the hill, much
people met him. And behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, I beseech thee,
look upon my son, for he is mine only child. And lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly
crieth out, and it teareth him, that he foameth again, and bruising him, hardly departeth
from him. And I besought thy disciples to cast him out, and they could not. And Jesus
answering said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you, and suffer you?
Bring thy son hither. And as he was yet a-coming, the devil threw him down, and tear him. And
Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and delivered him again to his
father. And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God. But while they wondered every
one at all things which Jesus did, he said unto his disciples, Let these sayings sink
down into your ears, for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men. But they
understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they perceived it not, and
they feared to ask him of that saying. Then there arose a reasoning among them, which
of them should be the greatest. And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took
a child, and set him by him, and said unto them, Whosoever shall receive this child in
thy name, receiveth me. And whosoever shall receive me, receiveth him that sent me. For
he that is least among you all, the same shall be great. And John answered, and said, Master,
we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and we forbade him, because he followeth not
with us. And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not, for he that is not against us, is for
us. And it came to pass, when the time was come, that he should be received up, he steadfastly
set his face to go to Jerusalem, and sent messengers before his face, and they went,
and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. And they did not receive
him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem. And when his disciples, James
and John saw this, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from
heaven and consume them, even as Elias did? But he turned, and rebuked them, and said,
Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them. And they went to another village, and it came to pass, that,
as they went in the way, a certain man said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever
thou goest. And Jesus said unto them, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests,
but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. And he said unto another, Follow me.
But he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father. Jesus said unto him, Let the
dead bury their dead, but go thou and preach the kingdom of God. And another also said,
Lord, I will follow thee, but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at home at
my house. And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plow, and looking
back, is fit for the kingdom of God. Chapter 10
After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before
his face into every city and place, whether he himself would come. Therefore said he unto
them, The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord
of the harvest that he would send forth laborers into his harvest. Go your ways. Behold I send
you forth as lambs among wolves, carrying neither purse nor scrip nor shoes, and salute
no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye enter first say, Peace be to this house.
And if the Son of Peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it. If not, it shall turn
to you again. And in the same house remain eating and drinking such things as they give,
for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever
city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you. And heal the
sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the
streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city which cleaveth on us, we
do wipe off against you. Notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you. But I say unto you that it shall be more tolerable in that day for
Sodom than for that city. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! For if the mighty
works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which have been done in you, they had a great while
ago repented sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon at the judgment than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt
be thrust down to hell. He that heareth you heareth me, and he that despiseth you despiseth
me, and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.
And the seven ye returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject
unto us through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the
power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding in this rejoice
not, that the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice because your names are
written in heaven. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit and said, I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. All things
are delivered to me of my Father, and no man knoweth who the Son is but the Father, and
the Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
And he turned him unto his disciples and said privately, Blessed are the eyes which see
the things that ye see, for I tell you that many prophets and kings have desired to see
those things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear,
and have not heard them. And behold a certain lawyer stood up and tempted him saying, Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life? And he said unto him, What is written in the law?
How readest thou? And he answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul and with all thy strength and with all thy mind and thy neighbor
as thyself. And he said unto him, Thou hast answered right, this do, and thou shalt live.
But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbor? And Jesus answering
said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among thieves which stripped
him of his raiment and wounded him and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance there
came down a certain priest that way, and when he saw him he passed by on the other side.
And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him and passed by
on the other side. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was and when
he saw him he had compassion on him, and went to him and bound up his wounds pouring in
oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn and took care of
him. And on the morrow when he departed he took out two pence and gave them to the host
and said unto him, Take care of him and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again I will
repay thee. Which now of these three thinkest thou was neighbor unto him that fell among
the thieves. And he said, He that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go and do
thou likewise. Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a certain village
and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called
Mary, which also sat at Jesus' feet and heard his word. But Martha was cumbered about,
much serving, and came to him and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left
me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto
her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing
is needful, and Mary hath chosen that good part which shall not be taken away from her.
Amen.